Lipid Disorders

Abnormalities in plasma lipoproteins and derangements in lipid metabolism rank among the most firmly established and best understood risk factors for atherosclerosis. Chapter 356 describes the lipoprotein classes and provides a detailed discussion of lipoprotein metabolism. Current ATP III guidelines recommend lipid screening in all adults >20 years of age. The screen should include a fasting lipid profile (total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, and HDL cholesterol) repeated every 5 years.

ATP III guidelines strive to match the intensity of treatment to an individual's risk. A quantitative estimate of risk places individuals in one of three treatment strata (Table 241-2). The first step in applying these guidelines involves counting an individual's risk factors (Table 241-1). Individuals with fewer than two risk factors fall into the lowest treatment intensity stratum [LDL goal <4.1 mmol/L (<160 mg/dL)]. In those with two or more risk factors, the next step involves a simple calculation that estimates the 10-year risk of developing coronary heart disease (CHD) (Table 241-2); see http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/cholesterol/ for the algorithm and a downloadable risk calculator. Those with a 10-year risk 20% fall into the intermediate stratum [LDL goal <3.4 mmol/L (<130 mg/dL)]. Those with a calculated 10-year CHD risk of >20%, any evidence of established atherosclerosis, or diabetes (now considered a CHD risk-equivalent) fall into the most intensive treatment group [LDL goal <2.6 mmol/L (<100 mg/dL)]. Members of the ATP III panel recently suggested <1.8 mmol/L (<70 mg/dL) as a goal for very high-risk patients and an optional goal for high-risk patients based on recent clinical trial data (Table 241-2). Beyond the Framingham algorithm, there are multiple risk calculators for various countries or regions. Risk calculators that incorporate family history of premature (CAD) and a marker of inflammation (CRP) have been validated for U.S. women and men.

The first maneuver to achieve the LDL goal involves therapeutic lifestyle changes (TLC), including specific diet and exercise recommendations established by the guidelines. According to ATP III criteria, those with LDL levels exceeding goal for their risk group by >0.8 mmol/L (>30 mg/dL) merit consideration for drug therapy. In patients with triglycerides >2.6 mmol/L (>200 mg/dL), ATP III guidelines specify a secondary goal for therapy: "non-HDL cholesterol" (simply, the HDL cholesterol level subtracted from the total cholesterol). Cutpoints for the therapeutic decision for non-HDL cholesterol are 0.8 mmol/L (30 mg/dL) more than those for LDL.

An extensive and growing body of rigorous evidence now supports the effectiveness of aggressive management of LDL. Addition of drug therapy to dietary and other nonpharmacologic measures reduces cardiovascular risk in patients with established coronary atherosclerosis and also in individuals who have not previously experienced CHD events (Fig. 241-3). As guidelines often lag the emerging clinical trial evidence base, the practitioner may elect to exercise clinical judgment in making therapeutic decisions in individual patients.

LDL-lowering therapies do not appear to exert their beneficial effect on cardiovascular events by causing a marked "regression" of stenoses. Angiographically monitored studies of lipid lowering have shown at best a modest reduction in coronary artery stenoses over the duration of study, despite abundant evidence of event reduction. These results suggest that the beneficial mechanism of lipid lowering does not require a substantial reduction in the fixed stenoses. Rather, the benefit may derive from "stabilization" of atherosclerotic lesions without decreased stenosis. Such stabilization of atherosclerotic lesions and the attendant decrease in coronary events may result from the egress of lipids or from favorably influencing aspects of the biology of atherogenesis discussed above. In addition, as sizable lesions may protrude abluminally rather than into the lumen due to complementary enlargement, shrinkage of such plaques may not be apparent on angiograms. The consistent benefit of LDL lowering by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) observed in many risk groups may depend not only on their salutary effects on the lipid profile but also on direct modulation of plaque biology independent of lipid lowering.

A new class of LDL-lowering medications reduces cholesterol absorption from the proximal small bowel by targeting an enterocyte cholesterol transporter denoted Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 protein (NPC1L1). The NPC1L1 inhibitor ezetimibe provides a useful adjunct to current therapies to achieve LDL goals; however, no clinical trial evidence has yet demonstrated that ezetimibe improves CHD outcomes.

As the mechanism by which elevated LDL levels promote atherogenesis probably involves oxidative modification, several trials have tested the possibility that antioxidant vitamin therapy might reduce CHD events. Rigorous and well-controlled clinical trials have failed to demonstrate that antioxidant vitamin therapy improves CHD outcomes. Therefore, the current evidence base does not support the use of antioxidant vitamins for this indication.

The clinical use of effective pharmacologic strategies for lowering LDL has reduced cardiovascular events markedly, but even their optimal utilization in clinical trials prevents only a minority of these endpoints. Hence, other aspects of the lipid profile have become tempting targets for addressing the residual burden of cardiovascular disease that persists despite aggressive LDL lowering. Indeed, in the "poststatin" era, patients with LDL levels at or below target not infrequently present with acute coronary syndromes. Low levels of HDL present a growing problem in patients with CAD as the prevalence of metabolic syndrome and diabetes increases. Blood HDL levels vary inversely with those of triglycerides, and the independent role of triglycerides as a cardiovascular risk factor remains unsettled. For these reasons, approaches to raising HDL have emerged as a prominent next hurdle in the management of dyslipidemia. Weight loss and physical activity can raise HDL. Nicotinic acid, particularly in combination with statins, can robustly raise HDL. Some clinical trial data support the effectiveness of nicotinic acid in cardiovascular risk reduction. However, flushing and pruritus remain a challenge to patient acceptance, even with improved dosage forms of nicotinic acid. A combination of nicotinic acid with an inhibitor of prostaglandin D receptor, a mediator of flushing, may limit this unwanted effect of nicotinic acid and is currently in clinical trials, but it has not received regulatory approval.

Agonists of nuclear receptors provide another potential avenue for raising HDL levels. Yet patients treated with peroxisome proliferator¡Vactivated receptors alpha and gamma (PPAR- and -) agonists have not consistently shown improved cardiovascular outcomes, and at least some PPAR-agonists have been associated with worsened cardiovascular outcomes. Other agents in clinical development raise HDL levels by inhibiting cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). The first of these agents to undergo large-scale clinical evaluation showed increased adverse events, leading to cessation of its development. Clinical studies currently underway will assess the effectiveness of other CETP inhibitors that lack some of the adverse off-target actions encountered with the first agent.
